---
layout: post
title: Ensuring last version of a package with puppet
author: david_villa
category: recipe
tags: puppet
lang: en
---

Puppet is a powerful software infrastructure manager. That is, a program that enable you to specify what is installed and running in each computer of your network.

<!--break-->

Puppet is a big and complex network application with servers (masters), clients (agent), certificates, encryption and so on. However puppet may be used in a easier way for easier problems. In this recipe we want to ensure that a specific debian package is installed in the last available version.

The things we want to happen (resources) are specified in a "manifest" file. In this case our very simplified manifest is:

{% highlight ruby %}
package {'openssh-server':
  ensure => latest,
}
{% endhighlight %}

To apply this "resource" we need to use the puppet agent. Usually the puppet agent is a daemon polling a remote master for manifest changes to apply. But here we run the agent just to apply the manifest and terminate.

<pre class="console">
$ sudo puppet apply --verbose site.pp
Warning: Could not retrieve fact fqdn
Info: Applying configuration version '1373396905'
Notice: /Stage[main]//Package[openssh-server]/ensure: ensure changed '1:6.2p2-5' to '1:6.2p2-6'
Notice: Finished catalog run in 18.93 seconds
</pre>

The interesting thing is the "Notice:" line that says the installed package openssh-server version has changed.

If you want to really ensure at any time, put that command in a file placed in @/etc/cron.hourly@ or similar.
